README.adoc, before:

= API Docs
:toc: macro

Examples and comparison of how a REST API can be documented with different technologies.

Goals are:

* have a detailed documentation (e.g. not limited to a one-line string per field)
* don't duplicate the documentation if the same field is used for different endpoints
* appropriate documentation in the IDE (i.e. Javadoc, for programming the server and the clients)
  as well as in tools like the Swagger Editor

The examples use OpenLiberty as server just because it not only supports MicroProfile OpenAPI,
but it comes also with an integrated UI. But the examples should run without any code changes
in any MicroProfile compatible server.

toc::[]

== Comparison

Comparison between the examples using JSON Schema, OpenAPI/typedefs and OpenAPI/constants

The OpenAPI output (the openapi.yaml files) are almost identical, so no comparison needed with respect
to the visual browsing of the interfaces.

[cols="1,2a,2a"]
|===
|Solution|Pros|Cons

|JSON Schema|
* no duplication
* The generated POJOs have Javadoc
* easy introduction of user-defined keys for structured documentation
|
* multiline documentation is cumbersome
* might lead to complicated code generation if you use other generators like MapStruct and/or lombok in the same project
* no specific IDE integration for the generation yet (what works best is `mvn compile` or `mvn generate-sources`)

|OpenAPI/typedefs|
* almost no duplication (just using both `SchemaType.STRING` and `JsonStringTypedef` is kind of duplication)
* typesafe interface
|
* No Javadoc
* Using the classes is less straightforward, especially with mapping libraries
* Not everyone likes to have a separate class for every field

|OpenAPI/constants|
* Easy Usage
|
* No Javadoc
* The annotations are duplicated (though not the texts)

|===

== OpenAPI

Example using OpenAPI 3 (The MicroProfile implementation, though Swagger would need almost no changes;
there are only small differences to the Swagger OpenAPI, e.g. there is no `responses` in the MicroProfile `@Operation`
or `@APIResponse` with MicroProfile vs. `@ApiResponse` with Swagger).

To avoid boilerplate code, https://projectlombok.org[Lombok] ist used

=== Workflow

* The OpenAPI implementation generates YAML and/or JSON output (e.g. `openapi.yaml`) out of the annotated Java classes
* A GUI tool like the Swagger Editor allows to browse the interface visually

=== Links

* https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-open-api/blob/master/spec/src/main/asciidoc/microprofile-openapi-spec.adoc#operation[MicroProfile OpenAPI Spec]
** https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-open-api/wiki/Annotation-Samples[Annotation Examples]
** https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-open-api/wiki/Static-File-Samples[YAML Output Examples]
* https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/blob/master/versions/3.0.2.md[(Swagger) OpenAPI Spec]

=== Demo

Launch the example with OpenLiberty (`mvn install liberty:run-server`)
and browse the interface on http://localhost:8080/openapi/ui/[http://localhost:8080/openapi/ui/]

You can also use the https://editor.swagger.io[Swagger Online Editor]
and open this URL:

* https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pe-st/apidocs/master/openapi-annotations/doc/openapi.yaml

=== Details

To document the objects and properties of a JSON REST payload, the `@Schema` annotation is enough.

To avoid duplication of the `@Schema` annotation between different endpoints,
two variants are demonstrated: using _typedefs_ and using _constants_.

==== Solution with Typedefs

The _typedef_ solution uses a dedicated type to carry the annotation;
e.g. `PurchaseAuthRequest` uses dedicated types for the properties:

[source,java]
----
@Schema(description = "Request for authorizing a Purchase")
public class PurchaseAuthRequest {

    private RequestUuid uuid;

    private Token token;

    private EmvTags emvTags;
}
----

For types that really are just primitive types or `String`s, a _typedef_ would be enough. Unfortunately Java has no _typedefs_,
thus a small wrapper type lets define dedicated with a minimal overhead (two constructors)

.`Token` is an example of a dedicated type
[source,java]
----
@Schema(type = SchemaType.STRING,
        description = "Token identifying a card, wallet, account etc\n"
                + "\n"
                + "May contain alphanumeric characters"
                + "\n\n"
                + "Fieldcode: C002")
public class Token extends JsonStringTypedef {
    public Token() {
    }

    public Token(String value) {
        super(value);
    }
}
----

The helper class `JsonStringTypedef` basically just defines the JSON serialization and deserialization,
avoiding a separate pair of curly brackets. `Token` is thus serialized as `"token": "42"` instead of `"token": { "token": "42" }`

[source,java]
----
@JsonIgnoreProperties(ignoreUnknown = true)
public abstract class JsonStringTypedef {

    @JsonValue
    private String value;

    public JsonStringTypedef() {}
    public JsonStringTypedef(String value) { this.value = value; }

    public String get() { return value; }
    public void set(String value) { this.value = value; }
}
----

==== Typedef Tradeoffs

* using subclasses of `JsonXxxTypedef` is a bit more cumbersome than just a String or Number property
* especially when using mapping libraries like http://mapstruct.org[MapStruct] the dedicated types might not easy to be mapped
* no way to have the same information in Javadoc and in OpenAPI without duplication and double maintenance


==== Solution with Constants

Many developers prefer a compromise between simplicity and duplication avoidance.
By using constants in the OpenAPI annotations a simpler class definition is possible
at the price of duplicating the annotations, but not their content:

[source,java]
----
import static xxx.PIN_BLOCK;
import static xxx.UUID;

@Schema(description = "Request for checking a PIN")
public class PinCheckRequest {

    @Schema(description = UUID)
    private String uuid;

    @Schema(description = PIN_BLOCK)
    private String pinBlock;
}
----

This allows maintaining the documentation for a field (e.g the `pinBlock field) for any endpoint in a central location.


== JSON Schema

Example schemas in link:tree/master/json-schema/src/main/resources/schema[json-schema/src/main/resources/schema]

Every endpoint gets its own schema, referencing a central schema file for shared definitions

.pin-check-response.json
[source,json]
----
{
  "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",

  "type": "object",
  "title": "PinCheckResponse",
  "description": "Tells if the PIN in the request was correct",

  "properties": {
    "result": { "$ref": "#/definitions/code" },
    "tries": { "$ref": "model.json#/tries" }
  },

  "definitions": {
    "code": {
      "type": "string",
      "enum": ["OK", "WRONG"],
      "description": "Result of the request"
    }
  }
}
----

This schema defines the response of the PIN Check endpoint as an object with two properties `result` and `tries`.

The `result` property is defined in the same schema file under the key `definitions`, while the `tries`
property is defined in a separate schema file, e.g. like this:

.model.json
[source,json]
----
{
  "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",

  "tries": {
    "type": "integer",
    "minimum" : 0,
    "maximum" : 9,
    "description": "Number of remaining tries"
  }
}
----

=== Workflow

* A Maven Plugin generates POJOs from the schema:
  https://github.com/joelittlejohn/jsonschema2pojo[jsonschema2pojo]
* The OpenAPI implementation generates YAML and/or JSON output (e.g. `openapi.yaml`) out of the POJOs
* A GUI tool like the Swagger Editor allows to browse the interface visually
* If desired, the service can validate the received JSON document against the schema

It's easily possible to add user-defined keys to the JSON schema (the Maven Plugin is programmable),
e.g. adding a key `ch-schlau-fieldcode` for any schema object:

[source,json]
----
{
  "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",

  "token": {
    "type": "string",
    "minLength" : 16,
    "maxLength" : 19,
    "description": "Token identifying a card, wallet, account etc\n\nMay contain alphanumeric characters",
    "ch-schlau-fieldcode": "C002"
  }
}
----


=== Links

* Introduction: http://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/[Understanding JSON Schema]
* Generate Java Code from JSON Schema:
** https://github.com/joelittlejohn/jsonschema2pojo[jsonschema2pojo]
** https://github.com/joelittlejohn/jsonschema2pojo/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md[changelog]

Remarks:

* OpenAPI Annotations are not supported out-of-the-box by jsonschema2pojo, but can easily
  be added with a custom annotator configured in the
  https://joelittlejohn.github.io/jsonschema2pojo/site/1.0.1/generate-mojo.html[maven plugin]
* At the same time also other annotations like `@JsonIgnoreProperties(ignoreUnknown = true)` can be added

=== JSON Schema Tradeoffs

* Longer documentation (multiline) is cumbersome (all on one line with `\n` or `&lt;p&gt;` separating the lines),
  though workarounds with proprietary keys in the schema are easily programmed (see `&quot;model.json#/token&quot;`
  and the `schema2pojo` submodule).


== Spring REST Docs

Work in progress, see link:spring-restdocs/README.md[Spring REST Docs]

Commit message:

Replace OpenLiberty with Quarkus
Quarkus/Openapi:
- ignores the @Schema annotation on EmvTags
- doesn't generate an operationId
- doesn't generate the enum values in the responses
- but generates the (unneeded) value property for the JsonXxxTypedef
  subclasses

README.adoc, after:

= API Docs
:toc: macro

Examples and comparison of how a REST API can be documented with different technologies.

Goals are:

* have a detailed documentation (e.g. not limited to a one-line string per field)
* don't duplicate the documentation if the same field is used for different endpoints
* appropriate documentation in the IDE (i.e. Javadoc, for programming the server and the clients)
  as well as in tools like the Swagger Editor

The examples use Quarkus as server just because it not only supports MicroProfile OpenAPI,
but it comes also with an integrated UI. But the examples should run without any code changes
in any MicroProfile compatible server.

toc::[]

== Comparison

Comparison between the examples using JSON Schema, OpenAPI/typedefs and OpenAPI/constants

The OpenAPI output (the openapi.yaml files) are almost identical, so no comparison needed with respect
to the visual browsing of the interfaces.

[cols="1,2a,2a"]
|===
|Solution|Pros|Cons

|JSON Schema|
* no duplication
* The generated POJOs have Javadoc
* easy introduction of user-defined keys for structured documentation
|
* multiline documentation is cumbersome
* might lead to complicated code generation if you use other generators like MapStruct and/or lombok in the same project
* no specific IDE integration for the generation yet (what works best is `mvn compile` or `mvn generate-sources`)

|OpenAPI/typedefs|
* almost no duplication (just using both `SchemaType.STRING` and `JsonStringTypedef` is kind of duplication)
* typesafe interface
|
* No Javadoc
* Using the classes is less straightforward, especially with mapping libraries
* Not everyone likes to have a separate class for every field

|OpenAPI/constants|
* Easy Usage
|
* No Javadoc
* The annotations are duplicated (though not the texts)

|===

== OpenAPI

Example using OpenAPI 3 (The MicroProfile implementation, though Swagger would need almost no changes;
there are only small differences to the Swagger OpenAPI, e.g. there is no `responses` in the MicroProfile `@Operation`
or `@APIResponse` with MicroProfile vs. `@ApiResponse` with Swagger).

To avoid boilerplate code, https://projectlombok.org[Lombok] ist used

=== Workflow

* The OpenAPI implementation generates YAML and/or JSON output (e.g. `openapi.yaml`) out of the annotated Java classes
* A GUI tool like the Swagger Editor allows to browse the interface visually

=== Links

* https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-open-api/blob/master/spec/src/main/asciidoc/microprofile-openapi-spec.adoc#operation[MicroProfile OpenAPI Spec]
** https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-open-api/wiki/Annotation-Samples[Annotation Examples]
** https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-open-api/wiki/Static-File-Samples[YAML Output Examples]
* https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/blob/master/versions/3.0.2.md[(Swagger) OpenAPI Spec]

=== Demo

Launch the example with Quarkus (`mvn compile quarkus:dev`)
and browse the interface on http://localhost:8080/swagger-ui/[http://localhost:8080/swagger-ui/]

You can also use the https://editor.swagger.io[Swagger Online Editor]
and open this URL:

* https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pe-st/apidocs/master/code-first-openapi-microprofile/doc/openapi.yaml

=== Details

To document the objects and properties of a JSON REST payload, the `@Schema` annotation is enough.

To avoid duplication of the `@Schema` annotation between different endpoints,
two variants are demonstrated: using _typedefs_ and using _constants_.

==== Solution with Typedefs

The _typedef_ solution uses a dedicated type to carry the annotation;
e.g. `PurchaseAuthRequest` uses dedicated types for the properties:

[source,java]
----
@Schema(description = "Request for authorizing a Purchase")
public class PurchaseAuthRequest {

    private RequestUuid uuid;

    private Token token;

    private EmvTags emvTags;
}
----

For types that really are just primitive types or `String`s, a _typedef_ would be enough. Unfortunately Java has no _typedefs_,
thus a small wrapper type lets define dedicated with a minimal overhead (two constructors)

.`Token` is an example of a dedicated type
[source,java]
----
@Schema(type = SchemaType.STRING,
        description = "Token identifying a card, wallet, account etc\n"
                + "\n"
                + "May contain alphanumeric characters"
                + "\n\n"
                + "Fieldcode: C002")
public class Token extends JsonStringTypedef {
    public Token() {
    }

    public Token(String value) {
        super(value);
    }
}
----

The helper class `JsonStringTypedef` basically just defines the JSON serialization and deserialization,
avoiding a separate pair of curly brackets. `Token` is thus serialized as `"token": "42"` instead of `"token": { "token": "42" }`

[source,java]
----
@JsonIgnoreProperties(ignoreUnknown = true)
public abstract class JsonStringTypedef {

    @JsonValue
    private String value;

    public JsonStringTypedef() {}
    public JsonStringTypedef(String value) { this.value = value; }

    public String get() { return value; }
    public void set(String value) { this.value = value; }
}
----

==== Typedef Tradeoffs

* using subclasses of `JsonXxxTypedef` is a bit more cumbersome than just a String or Number property
* especially when using mapping libraries like http://mapstruct.org[MapStruct] the dedicated types might not easy to be mapped
* no way to have the same information in Javadoc and in OpenAPI without duplication and double maintenance


==== Solution with Constants

Many developers prefer a compromise between simplicity and duplication avoidance.
By using constants in the OpenAPI annotations a simpler class definition is possible
at the price of duplicating the annotations, but not their content:

[source,java]
----
import static xxx.PIN_BLOCK;
import static xxx.UUID;

@Schema(description = "Request for checking a PIN")
public class PinCheckRequest {

    @Schema(description = UUID)
    private String uuid;

    @Schema(description = PIN_BLOCK)
    private String pinBlock;
}
----

This allows maintaining the documentation for a field (e.g the `pinBlock field) for any endpoint in a central location.


== JSON Schema

Example schemas in link:tree/master/json-schema/src/main/resources/schema[json-schema/src/main/resources/schema]

Every endpoint gets its own schema, referencing a central schema file for shared definitions

.pin-check-response.json
[source,json]
----
{
  "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",

  "type": "object",
  "title": "PinCheckResponse",
  "description": "Tells if the PIN in the request was correct",

  "properties": {
    "result": { "$ref": "#/definitions/code" },
    "tries": { "$ref": "model.json#/tries" }
  },

  "definitions": {
    "code": {
      "type": "string",
      "enum": ["OK", "WRONG"],
      "description": "Result of the request"
    }
  }
}
----

This schema defines the response of the PIN Check endpoint as an object with two properties `result` and `tries`.

The `result` property is defined in the same schema file under the key `definitions`, while the `tries`
property is defined in a separate schema file, e.g. like this:

.model.json
[source,json]
----
{
  "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",

  "tries": {
    "type": "integer",
    "minimum" : 0,
    "maximum" : 9,
    "description": "Number of remaining tries"
  }
}
----

=== Workflow

* A Maven Plugin generates POJOs from the schema:
  https://github.com/joelittlejohn/jsonschema2pojo[jsonschema2pojo]
* The OpenAPI implementation generates YAML and/or JSON output (e.g. `openapi.yaml`) out of the POJOs
* A GUI tool like the Swagger Editor allows to browse the interface visually
* If desired, the service can validate the received JSON document against the schema

It's easily possible to add user-defined keys to the JSON schema (the Maven Plugin is programmable),
e.g. adding a key `ch-schlau-fieldcode` for any schema object:

[source,json]
----
{
  "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",

  "token": {
    "type": "string",
    "minLength" : 16,
    "maxLength" : 19,
    "description": "Token identifying a card, wallet, account etc\n\nMay contain alphanumeric characters",
    "ch-schlau-fieldcode": "C002"
  }
}
----


=== Links

* Introduction: http://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/[Understanding JSON Schema]
* Generate Java Code from JSON Schema:
** https://github.com/joelittlejohn/jsonschema2pojo[jsonschema2pojo]
** https://github.com/joelittlejohn/jsonschema2pojo/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md[changelog]

Remarks:

* OpenAPI Annotations are not supported out-of-the-box by jsonschema2pojo, but can easily
  be added with a custom annotator configured in the
  https://joelittlejohn.github.io/jsonschema2pojo/site/1.0.1/generate-mojo.html[maven plugin]
* At the same time also other annotations like `@JsonIgnoreProperties(ignoreUnknown = true)` can be added

=== JSON Schema Tradeoffs

* Longer documentation (multiline) is cumbersome (all on one line with `\n` or `&lt;p&gt;` separating the lines),
  though workarounds with proprietary keys in the schema are easily programmed (see `&quot;model.json#/token&quot;`
  and the `schema2pojo` submodule).


== Spring REST Docs

Work in progress, see link:spring-restdocs/README.md[Spring REST Docs]
